.. _plband:

plband: Plot a set of passbands.
================================

**Package: synphot**

.. raw:: html

  <section id="s_usage">
  <h3>Usage</h3>
  <p>
  plspec obsmode 
  </p>
  </section>
  <section id="s_description">
  <h3>Description</h3>
  <p>
  This task plots a synthetic passband by combining throughputs for
  telscope components, passbands read from files, and certain functional
  forms, such as a Gaussian or a rectangular window. The passband is
  specified by passing an expression in the 'obsmode' parameter. The
  syntax for this expression is described in the help file for calcband.
  </p>
  <p>
  The user can control certain plot attributes, such as the scaling and
  line type and append the plot to a previous plot genarated by plband.
  </p>
  </section>
  <section id="s_parameters">
  <h3>Parameters</h3>
  <dl id="l_obsmode">
  <dt><b>obsmode [string]</b></dt>
  <!-- Sec='PARAMETERS' Level=0 Label='obsmode' Line='obsmode [string]' -->
  <dd>The command used to create the synthetic passband. The command syntax
  is described in the help file for calcband. More than one passband can
  be plotted by placing the commands in a file, whose name is passed to
  this parameter, preceded by a <span style="font-family: monospace;">"@"</span> character, e.g., '@filename'. The
  keywords which make up the observing mode are explained further in the
  obsmode task.
  </dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
  <dt><b>(left = INDEF) [real]</b></dt>
  <!-- Sec='PARAMETERS' Level=0 Label='' Line='(left = INDEF) [real]' -->
  <dd>Minimum wavelength to plot. If set to INDEF, the task will set it to
  the minimum wavelength in the wavelength set.
  </dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
  <dt><b>(right = INDEF) [real]</b></dt>
  <!-- Sec='PARAMETERS' Level=0 Label='' Line='(right = INDEF) [real]' -->
  <dd>Maximum wavelength to plot. If set to INDEF, the task will set it to
  the maximum wavelength in the wavelength set.
  </dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
  <dt><b>(bottom = INDEF) [real]</b></dt>
  <!-- Sec='PARAMETERS' Level=0 Label='' Line='(bottom = INDEF) [real]' -->
  <dd>Minimum passband value to plot. If set to INDEF, the task will set it
  to the minimum passband value.
  </dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
  <dt><b>(top = INDEF) [real]</b></dt>
  <!-- Sec='PARAMETERS' Level=0 Label='' Line='(top = INDEF) [real]' -->
  <dd>Maximum passband value to plot. If set to INDEF, the task will set it
  to the maximum passband value.
  </dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
  <dt><b>(normalize = no) [boolean]</b></dt>
  <!-- Sec='PARAMETERS' Level=0 Label='' Line='(normalize = no) [boolean]' -->
  <dd>Normalize all passbands to a maximum value of 1?  If 'normalize = no',
  each curve is plotted at its intrinsic level.
  </dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
  <dt><b>(ylog = no) [boolean]</b></dt>
  <!-- Sec='PARAMETERS' Level=0 Label='' Line='(ylog = no) [boolean]' -->
  <dd>Create a semilogarithmic plot?
  </dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
  <dt><b>(append = no) [boolean]</b></dt>
  <!-- Sec='PARAMETERS' Level=0 Label='' Line='(append = no) [boolean]' -->
  <dd>Append results to an existing plot? 
  </dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
  <dt><b>(ltype = <span style="font-family: monospace;">"solid"</span>) [string]</b></dt>
  <!-- Sec='PARAMETERS' Level=0 Label='' Line='(ltype = "solid") [string]' -->
  <dd>The line type to be used for plotting the mode1 passband.  The allowed
  values are: clear, solid, dashed, dotted, and dotdash.
  </dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
  <dt><b>(device = <span style="font-family: monospace;">"stdgraph"</span>) [string]</b></dt>
  <!-- Sec='PARAMETERS' Level=0 Label='' Line='(device = "stdgraph") [string]' -->
  <dd>Send output to the designated device.
  </dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
  <dt><b>(wavetab = <span style="font-family: monospace;">""</span>) [file name]</b></dt>
  <!-- Sec='PARAMETERS' Level=0 Label='' Line='(wavetab = "") [file name]' -->
  <dd>Name of an optional wavelength table or file. An appropriate table can
  be generated by using the 'genwave' task. If a table is used, the
  wavelength column name must be <span style="font-family: monospace;">"WAVELENGTH"</span>. If an ASCII file is used
  the first column is taken to be the wavelength column.  The
  subdirectory 'synphot$data has ASCII wavelength tables useful for
  specific HST passbands.  
  If no wavelength table is specified, a default wavelength set is
  used. The default wavelength table covers the wavelength range where
  the passband is non-zero. Wavelengths are spaced logarithmically over
  this range. If there is more than one passband, the range is computed
  based on the first passband. If the wavelength range of the spectra
  differ significantly, a wavelength table should be specified
  explicitly.
  </dd>
  </dl>
  <dl>
  <dt><b>(refdata = <span style="font-family: monospace;">""</span>) [pset name]</b></dt>
  <!-- Sec='PARAMETERS' Level=0 Label='' Line='(refdata = "") [pset name]' -->
  <dd>Parameter set for reference data used in calculations.
  This pset contains the following parameters:
  <div class="highlight-default-notranslate"><pre>
  
  area = 45238.93416:  HST telescope area in cm**2.
  
  grtbl = "mtab$*.tmg":  HST graph table.  By default, this
          uses the more recent version.
  
  cmptbl = "mtab$*.tmc":  Instrument component table.  By
          default, this uses the more recent version.
  </pre></div>
  </dd>
  </dl>
  </section>
  <section id="s_examples">
  <h3>Examples</h3>
  <p>
  1. Plot the WFPC,F555W passband as a solid line.
  </p>
  <div class="highlight-default-notranslate"><pre>
  sy&gt; plband wfpc,f555w
  </pre></div>
  <p>
  2. Plot a modified Gaussian on a logarithmic scale as a dotted line.  Set
  the minimum value to 1.e-5
  </p>
  <div class="highlight-default-notranslate"><pre>
  sy&gt; plband "tilt(gauss(6000,1000),.1,.8,.2)" ltype=dotted bot=1.e-5 yl+
  </pre></div>
  </section>
  <section id="s_references">
  <h3>References</h3>
  <p>
  Written by B.Simon based on XCAL code written by Keith Horne
  </p>
  </section>
  <section id="s_see_also">
  <h3>See also</h3>
  <p>
  calcband, plspec
  </p>
  
  </section>
  
  <!-- Contents: 'NAME' 'USAGE' 'DESCRIPTION' 'PARAMETERS' 'EXAMPLES' 'REFERENCES' 'SEE ALSO'  -->
  
